---
author: cookrn
date: 2019-03-27
layout: post	
title: Reroute
---

In the last example, the errors were still copied and pasted from the previous
on-system attempts making them a bit confusing in our new Docker-based world.

Now, to build the project, there are 1.5 prerequisites: Docker and Docker Compose
if your Docker distribution didn't ship with it. Then, just run `make` to rebuild
the dev container specified in the `Dockerfile`.

Having an easily rebuildable dev environment for this type of task has proved
very helpful because of the amount of trial and error needed. On a laptop, it can
be challenging to constantly download, compile, edit, reconfigure, etc... but
with the container you get a fresh start at every rebuild.

So, in our new world, let's reroute. The good news is, after some tinkering, the
`foreign` and `base2` tooling compiles. The other news is that it took some
wild detours and digging into interesting and old code. I don't have a background
or familiarity with C infrastructure, so it took some searching. Here's the
highlights:

### Uncovering Boom, GSL, and C

After lots of reading through the code in the various projects, there are a few
tools that they all seem to depend on. Thankfully, they were already in a decent
build state. Once I realized that, running a `make install` for them succeeded
right away.

Most of the other projects in the repository had incomplete `Makefile`s or had
partially generated source files. Playing with Boom a bit after it was installed,
I realized that they weren't meant to be configured with Boom and then used with
Make. Instead, they were meant to be used fully with Boom. After poking around a
bit more, the `boom all` command was most helpful at cleaning, generating, and
compiling.

```
root@84e70aa81915:/usr/src/base# boom --help
'boom' prepares and executes the build process.

Usage: boom [OPTION]... [COMMAND]...

Configuration:
  -h, --help              Display this help information
  -v, --verbose           Trace build commands
  -V, --version           Display version information
  
Commands:
  configure               Configure project (generates boomake)
  version                 Show project version
  build                   Build project
  test                    Test project
  compile                 Build project w/o regenerating source
  install                 Install project
  clean                   Clean project
  distsrc                 Create project source package
  all                     clean, configure, build, test, install
  help                    Show list of allowed commands
```

### Compiling APR

We left off in the last post being stuck unable to compile the base2 tooling
because the compiler was unable to locate the `base_apr.h` header file. Since we
can see find that file in the `foreign` libraries, let's try to compile them
instead. Foreign is structured similar to other iMatix libraries with five sub
projects: C, APR, PCRE, ZLIB, and Tests. These can be seen as directories within
the project but are also specified in the `project.pdl` file.

The first challenge in compiling was around libtool. The APR wrapper library has
two vendored sets of source for `libapr` and `libaprutil`. Both were many versions
behind what is now current and don't work with the version of libtool that now
ships with Debian Stretch. The approach that ended up working was to upgrade both
libraries to the current stable versions. That brought `libapr` up from 1.3.3 to
1.6.5 and `libaprutil` up from 1.3.4 to 1.6.1. While fetching the updated sources
and attempting to build them a few additional tweaks had to be made.

First, based on the `sh` code in APR's `project.pdl`, it looks like previously the
library had been setup to build statically. The new sources needed to be run through
the GNU Autotools suite so that they were able to compile in the Dockerized environment.
This took us into edits of APR's `project.pdl` to add a `./buildconf` step prior
to running `./configure`. 

Next, during the `./configure` step, there were a few options around the static
build that needed removed: `--without-libtool` and `--disable-shared`. This allowed
both `libapr` to compile successfully, but `libaprutil` still failed due to
missing headers for a library called Expat. Expat is a C library for streaming
XML parsing that was previously packaged with `libaprutil` but now is a separate
dependency. Following standard GNU installation procedures with Expat placed the
required dependencies in `/usr/local` and then allowed `libaprutil` to compile
as well.

Lastly, the wrapper still failed due to attempting to use the `ranlib` tool on
Libtool files instead of on `ar` archives. I'm not quite sure why the existing
scripts would have been copying Libtool `.la` files to be named as `.a` library
archives, but as best I could tell it was only a bug. Copying the appropriate
`.a` files instead and updating the build scripts appropriately allowed all of
the Foreign package to build.

### Where has APR_SO_ERROR gone?

Once moving onto compiling the Base2 tools, things went fairly smooth with Foreign
being already compiled and installed. The only build error that occurred was
around the symbol named `APR_SO_ERROR`. Digging into mid-00s APR history, it
seems to be a short lived symbol for fetching options from a socket. As none of
the current symbols seem to be replacements, I ended up replacing the calls to
`apr_socket_opt_get` using the error symbol with calls to `apr_get_netos_error`.
The replacement function returns the last socket error as a known APR status, which
should be of the expected value type, but given how no specific socket is
specified, I'm not sure if this will introduce bugs. After the last fix mentioned
below, it did allow all of Base2 to compile though.

### Gurudoc

One Base2 tool had a PDL declaration specifying a documentation set for PAL which
was supposed to be compiled. Instead of getting Base1 or Gurudoc to compile, I
simply commented out the directive for now to proceed. If it weren't documentation,
it could have turned into another rabbit hole.

## Conclusion

Now that the toolchain is compiled, the goal is to start factoring out the libraries
back into top-level source projects in this repository so that each can be
utilized or maintained in a cleaner way. I'll also attempt to start producing examples
as well as documentation on how to leverage the packages, tools, and various XML
dialects. Onwards and sideways!
